Analyzing the Correlation between Health Issues and Treatment in Intensive Care Units of COVID-19 in Mexico using Generalized Additive Models(GAMs) 

Abstract
 The COVID-19 had a global impact, especially affecting people that have previous health issues such as diabetes, obesities, and asthma. This thesis aims to analyze the COVID-19 dataset for Mexico to assess the impact of health issues to treatment in intensive care units and propose solutions to the data conducted using Generalized Additive Models (GAMs). The main focus of this paper is to determine the correlation between the COVID-19 hospitalizations and pre-existing conditions such as obesity, diabetes, and pregnancy (only in females). By employing analysis and modeling, the research provides insights into the relationships between the preexisting conditions and the response to the treatment. Furthermore, going into the detail of how age plays a factor into it.  The implications of the study is essential for informing future responses to pandemic and public health outcomes in Mexico. This analysis provides significant information to the health care providers on how preexisting conditions could lead to the treatment in ICU units in Mexico using Generalized Additive Models (GAMs) and how this technique could lead to decision-making in health crises.   

Introduction
Severe acute respiratory syndrome by a coronavirus is responsible for COVID-19 that started  in December 2019. Since then, seven million deaths have occurred worldwide. COVID-19 also had a severe impact in Mexico, leading to the 333,188 deaths and 7,483,444 cases. Mexico has been one of the countries severely affected by the pandemic due to its high infection rates. Respiratory insufficiency is the most fatal form of COVID-19, requiring intensive care unit treatment (ICU). Those most at risk include individuals over the age of 60 with underlying health conditions. Hospitalization rate in Mexico was around 120,000 leading to the higher number of hospitalization rates compared to the other countries like the United Kingdom, Italy, and Spain. 
The older adults presented more severe symptoms for COVID-19, but in Mexico it seemed like the population under the age of 60 were also infected by COVID-19. This is associated with the preexisting health conditions such as obesity, hypertension, and diabetes. The hospital administration seems to have an increase as the peak of the COVID-19. The preexisting conditions such as heart conditions, diabetes, obesity have a negative impact on survival in the Mexican population. In addition, other conditions affecting the severity of COVID-19 such as pregnancy are leading to the consideration of the identification of the riskiest conditions. The experience in the results in Mexico may be useful for identification of the correlation between the preexisting conditions and the number of stays in ICUs due to COVID-19. 
The aim of this study is to analyze the preexisting conditions of confirmed cases with COVID-19 and the number of patients at ICU. The correlation between the preexisting conditions and the hospitalization. Furthermore, assessing the impact of different factors such as age, sex, pregnancy factor. 
Problem Analysis
	COVID-19 had disproportionately affected individuals with preexisting conditions, leading at higher rates of severe illness and ICU admissions. Pre-existing conditions such as obesity, diabetes,  hypertension, and cardiovascular diseases  have been identified as significant risk factors for severe COVID-19 outcomes that require intensive care unit admissions. Data from the Mexican Ministry of Health indicated that over 70% of COVID-19 patients requiring ICU care had at least one comorbidity. 
	Furthermore, the healthcare strain led to the pressure due to the increase in COVID-19 cases. Intensive care unit admission due to COVID-19 leading to a crisis in providing adequate care to all patients. Due to high occupancy of the rates at that time, the strain on healthcare resources can lead to inconsistencies in data reporting. Thus, the numbers presented in the data could be missing and unknown in some scenarios. 
	Age and sex are crucial factors in influencing COVID-19 severity and outcomes. The population over the age of 60 are recognized as the most vulnerable to the disease and ICU admissions. Additionally, there have been disproportionately between men and women in severe COVID-19 outcomes.  Pregnancy  is also determined as a factor that could affect the admission to ICU, leading to a high risk of severe illness and adverse pregnancy outcomes. 
	The Mexico dataset found in Kaggle created a problem due to the number of unknown, shown as 97 in the data and the administration shown as 1 or 2, either a positive or negative. The data having a lot of unknown in the dataset brought a problem leading to overfitting in the dataset. This lack of data due to the collection issues during pandemic provided a significant skewness in some factors in the data as well. 	

Proposed Solution 
	The use of advanced statistical models to analyze COVID-19 data plays a significant factor in understanding the factors influencing infection rates, ICU admissions, and healthcare outcomes. The Generalized Additive Model is used to analyze COVID-19 data and collect data from COVID-19 dataset in Mexico that is found in Kaggle. The missing values and any inconsistencies are handled due to cleaning the data to remove duplicates and aiming for the reliability of the analysis. The aim of the GAM model was to capture non-linear relationships between variables. 
	GAM modeling is well-suited for this analysis because of handling the nonlinear relationships between variables and having high interpretability. ICU admission rates are influenced by many factors such as age, pre existing conditions(diabetes, cardiovascular problems, obesities…), age and sex. GAM could lead to making simple statements about the effects of the predictive variables.  Thus, this type of modeling also identifies the age factor, with identifying high-risk groups and regions, leading to the identification of the conditions affecting the most high-risk groups and regions. This is crucial for not only the COVID-19 cases, but also for other viral diseases that could lead to admission rates in ICUs in Mexico. 
	Using linear regression models was considered in order to determine the relationships between the age and admission rates in ICUs in Mexico. Furthermore, the preexisting conditions and admission rates in ICUs. However, this was not a solution due to the fact that the data involved more complexity and should be addressed using non-linear relationships. 
	Dealing with Nas (which presented as 97) in the dataset played a factor in having accurate results. The data was filtered into sex in order to handle missing values. 

Methodology: 
Analyzing COVID-19 data in Mexico involved implementation of data collection and advanced statistical analysis. Data was gathered from the Kaggle dataset. This dataset was the collection of data from multiple sources such as public health databases, hospital admission and registrations. The rich dataset was ensured in order to have tobacco usage, asthma, hypertension, cardiovascular and immunosuppressants and its connection to ICU admissions. The data also presented the age factor and how these comorbidities change with the age group. The data was filtered into fewer factors in order to ensure accuracy and consistency. Furthermore, the missing values and filtration system was used to separate the male and female data set, specifically dealing with the pregnancy factor. 
The Generalized Additive Model was employed for the analysis to determine the non-linear relationship between variables. Exploratory Data Analysis was performed to identify trends and patterns. Calculation of confusion matrix was conducted in order to determine the rate of specificity  and sensitivity of the data. The creation of visualization was performed in order to better analyze the results and identify any anomalies in the data. 
Results & Conclusion 
Based on the results, ICU admission rates seem to be peaking around age over 50s and then decreasing it after. The confidence intervals suggest significant variables in older age groups. Obesity seems to be not the only factor on the admission rates. Since ICU admissions could have many factors, it seems like a high level of uncertainty leading obesity to not determining the ICU admission alone. There seems to be a positive relationship between kidney disease and ICU admission risk. Cardiovascular disease seems to have a definitely positive relationship with the ICU admission risk and affecting mostly the elderly. Hypertension has a strong possible relation with the elderly ICU admission rates. Asthma seems to have an impact more on the younger people compared to elderly. The area under the curve appears to be around 0.6-0.7, leading to moderate predictive of the model. In this model, it can be seen as age, cardiovascular and hypertension are the most strong predictors of ICU admission. 
The COVID-19 posed a significant increase in the rates of ICU admissions. The most vulnerable group was the ones that had pre-existing conditions. The high admission at that time led to all the missing data in Mexico and not being able to get an enough rate of admission and conditions registered. By conducting a GAM model, the non-linear relationship according to the age between the preexisting conditions and ICUs was determined. The Generalized Additive Model that was conducted revealed that kidney disease , cardiovascular disease, and hypertension were major risk factors for severe outcomes. GAM analysis shows that age and chronic diseases  were a strong determinant in predicting the need for chronic disease to decrease the potential of the admission rates in the future crisis. 


References: 
"Effect of Comorbidities and Risk Conditions on Death from COVID-19 in Migrants in Mexico." International Journal for Equity in Health, BioMed Central, 2021, https://equityhealthj.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12939-021-01599-9 .  Accessed June 3rd 2024
"Covid-19 Incidence and Mortality by Age Strata and Comorbidities in Mexico City: A Focus in the Pediatric Population." Frontiers, Frontiers Media, 2021, https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/public-health/articles/10.3389/fpubh.2022.969251/full . Accessed June 3rd 2024
Shadmehr, Mehdi, and Massoud Moslehi. "The Repression Puzzle: Mobilization, Repression, and Inequality." ResearchGate, https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Mehdi-Shadmehr/publication/229053120_The_Repression_Puzzle_Mobilization_Repression_and_Inequality/links/5602108408ae42bbd541f66a/The-Repression-Puzzle-Mobilization-Repression-and-Inequality.pdf . Accessed June 3rd 2024
Clark, Michael. "Application of Generalized Additive Models." Generalized Additive Models, https://m-clark.github.io/generalized-additive-models/application.html. Accessed June 3rd 2024
How to Calculate AUC (Area Under Curve) in R." GeeksforGeeks, https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/how-to-calculate-auc-area-under-curve-in-r/ Accessed June 3rd 2024
